Python tutor notes — SmartCare appointment booking
Introductory Software Technology

The function we are looking at (from task1enhanced.py):

    appointments = []

    def book_appointment(patient_name, practitioner_name, appointment_time):
        if not patient_name:
            raise ValueError("Patient name cannot be empty")
        appointment = {
            "patient": patient_name,
            "practitioner": practitioner_name,
            "time": appointment_time
        }
        appointments.append(appointment)


1. What the code does

appointments is a list that starts empty. It is the in-memory “filing cabinet” for every booking.

book_appointment is a function with three parameters: patient name, practitioner name, and appointment time.

First it checks the patient name. In Python, an empty string is “falsy”, so `if not patient_name` is True when the name is missing. In that case the function raises ValueError and stops. Nothing is added to the list.

If the name is not empty, the function builds a dictionary with three keys: "patient", "practitioner", and "time". A dictionary stores related facts about one appointment in one object.

append puts that dictionary on the end of the appointments list. The function does not print anything; storing the booking is its only job. display_appointments (a separate function) later walks the list and prints each booking.

When the program runs, it books Alice Smith with Dr. John Doe at 10:00 AM and Bob Johnson with Dr. Jane Roe at 11:30 AM, then displays both.


2. Three limitations

Limitation 1 — Almost no validation.
Only an empty patient name is rejected. An empty practitioner, a nonsense time such as "asdf", or a blank time are all accepted.

Limitation 2 — No clash checking.
Two patients can be booked with the same practitioner at the same time. The list never looks at existing rows before append.

Limitation 3 — Data lives only in RAM.
The list is created when the program starts and is thrown away when it ends. There is no file or database, so a receptionist cannot reopen the program later and still see today’s appointments.


3. Suggested improvements (ideas only — not a rewrite)

- Validate practitioner name and time as well as patient name (for example, reject empty strings).
- Treat appointment_time as a real date/time, or at least require a consistent format, so sorting and clash checks are possible.
- Before append, scan appointments and refuse a booking if that practitioner already has that time.
- Return the new appointment (or a success message) so the caller knows the booking worked, instead of only mutating a global list.
- Later (next stage of the course): save the list to a file so bookings survive after the program closes.

These are small, local changes to how booking works. They do not require rebuilding the whole clinic system.


4. Scope reminder

This note explains and critiques book_appointment. It does not rewrite SmartCare or replace task1enhanced.py.


5. Two questions to test your understanding

Question A
The line `if not patient_name:` raises ValueError for an empty patient name.
Would the same check catch a practitioner name that is an empty string? Why or why not?

Question B
book_appointment appends a dictionary to the global list appointments.
If you ran book_appointment three times with valid names, how many dictionaries would be in appointments, and would display_appointments print all of them? Explain briefly.
